---
layout: single
title:  "The content / interface abstraction"
date:   2014-10-16
excerpt_separator: <!--more-->
---

At a [recent conference](http://uha.udayton.edu/conf.html), I took part
in a workshop for Urban Historians entitled “Workshop: Digital Projects
from the Ground Up.” The basic structure was for two halves: first,  a
conversation between “experts” on digital projects (me, Mitch Fraas from
Penn, and Matt Shoemaker from Temple) and a small group of historians
who were starting or considering starting digital projects; second,
project-based consultations on each of the specific projects. In the
opening question, we were asked about sustainability– how could these
historians make sure their digital projects would be sustainable. I
jumped in with my standard answer — I advocated separating content from
interface in thinking and planning for a project. And I do think that’s
the right way to go.  By thinking about the data that your project will
produce, and planning for the long term preservation of that data, you
can take more risks with interface, think more about the user experience
without expecting that user experience now will be the same as user
experience in 10 years (it won’t). The librarian in me wants content as
flexible and sharable as possible. When we work on our own projects at
Haverford, I am committed to making sure we work with systems that will
allow us to export content, and to keeping track of which parts of a
project will be saved and for how long, and to think separately about
presentation.

<!--more-->
However, as I look back on that conference session and the conversations
we had, I struggle somewhat with the binary that I’m assuming and
accepting in my endorsement of the content vs interface approach.
Because the notion of Content as separate from (and in some ways, more
important than) interface is not nearly so simple. Interface, context
and design constitute meaning together, and this idealized “content” I’m
advocating for the preservation of embeds a whole system of meaning. It
is never and should not be construed as information devoid of
subjectivity. By thinking of the project as a set of csv or xml or json
or txt files alongside some javascript and bells and whistles, I want to
attend to ways that I might be fetishizing “data” at the expense of more
important meaning.  I want to make sure that I’m not pretending that the
information/content/data is objective, or that by insisting on its
re-usability, I’m not ignoring the ways that the system that produced it
is full of meaning. As Kate Crawford, Kate Miltner, and Mary Gray  put
it

> “In an “informatics of domination” that gathers all the data it can to
> unlock some presumed or as-yet-unknown value down the road, data
> generation and collection are equated with innovation and scientific
> breakthroughs.”

[Critiquing Big Data: Politics, Ethics,
Epistemology](http://ijoc.org/index.php/ijoc/article/view/2167/1164),
International Journal of Communication 8 (2014), 1663–1672

Ideally, each digital project should be conceived as a whole project
where the meaning is built from the intersections of content,
experience, design, interface etc.  The argument made in the experience
and the data aren’t separable. What does it mean to preserve this
notional content as csv, json, or xml when we know that, in every case,
the interface matters.

One could struggle with these battling impulses. Lucky for me, my sister
reminds me that action = compromise, and that is ok. There are so many
seemingly unacceptable compromises implicit in action. I don’t want to
engage in this positivistic approach to “data” as abstracted and
divorced from meaning. And yet, there I am (here I am) advocating for
starting a project with an awareness of which parts of the meaning you
hope to construct should be considered “data” or “content” and which
parts should be considered “interface”. Plans must be made. And data and
content can be re-used, re-imagined, and exported. They should be stored
in repositories. For interfaces, we make different plans. Interfaces can
be preserved for some length of time, but at this point in development,
we probably assume that aspects of them will fade or degrade at some
point. In practice, it’s not hard to do that abstracting. Figuring out
which parts of a project are ‘data’ and which parts are interface is
generally really easy and valuable. It’s just a little dangerous. And
that danger is worth paying attention to.

And of course, these are  all thoughts people have had before. But, each
new project requires the same work of compromise, the same action.

I’m sure I will continue advocating for the thoughtful separation of
content and interface, as I did at the presentation last week. Because
it’s the right way to go (of course, on my own projects, we try to save
both for as long as it makes sense to do that, but still.) And I suppose
that’s the cost of building things.
