---
layout: single
title:  "Turning Library Records into Data: A Conversation & Workshop"
date:   2014-11-15
excerpt_separator: <!--more-->
---

#### Update: It happened — [links and slides here](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1qfD6THzDMGn1joNFwCMlCiCyMiWISYPMEnILAMAOiUc/edit)

#### Tuesday, December 9, 2014, 1:00-4:45pm

#### Library Company of Philadelphia Cassatt House, 1320 Locust Street Philadelphia, PA

Visit
[www.librarycompany.org/events](http://www.eventbrite.com/e/turning-library-records-into-data-a-conversation-workshop-tickets-14303198251?ref=ebtnebregn)
to register!

Turning Library Records into Data: A Conversation & Workshop

Tuesday, December 9, 2014, 1:00-4:45pm

Library Company of Philadelphia Cassatt House, 1320 Locust Street
Philadelphia, PA

As more and more hackers, students, and scholars are engaging in
creative projects that require “big data,”this two-part session invites
librarians and archivists to think through ways to expose their
collections to interpretation and analysis by digital humanities
scholars, students, and local hackers, and to make those collections
easily mappable<span class="s1">.</span>
<!--more-->
**Presenters:**

Laurie Allen, Coordinator for Digital Scholarship and Services,
Haverford College

Doreva Belfiore, Digital Projects Librarian, Temple University

Nabil Kashyap, Librarian for Digital Initiatives and Scholarship,
Swarthmore College

Delphine Khanna, Head of Digital Library Initiatives , Temple University

Nicole Scalessa, IT Manager, the Library Company of Philadelphia

**Part 1: 1:00-3:00PM**

In the first half of this workshop, we will highlight some example uses
for library data, and lead a discussion about how Galleries, Libraries,
Archives, and Museums can make their collection information available
for re-use by scholars and activists. We will focus on concrete steps
that librarians and archivists can take to expose their collection data
for reuse, including small, lightweight options and more robust, larger
scale possibilities.

Discussion topics will include:

• “What is our data?”

• “What can we usefully export from our various systems?”

• “What format and what documentation should we provide to make the data
most accessible?”

• “What are some example questions that our data might help us address?”

• “Once I’ve opened my data, where should I put it?”

• “What is the DPLA, and is Pennsylvania going to start participating in
it?”

**Part 2: 3:15-4:45PM**

The second part of this workshop will help catalogers and metadata
managers develop ways to add geospatial metadata to collection records
that refer to places (For example, works about the built environment or
that include addresses or specific locations.)

Discussion topics will include:

• “What successful models of geospatial metadata are currently in use
that advocate for wider implementation?”

• “What are some current geospatial metadata standards?”

• “What resources are available for learning more?”
